JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
firestorm heats up around Donald
Trump Jr., as details emerge
of his contacts with highly
placed Russians who offered
dirt on Hillary Clinton during
the presidential race.
Then: the second chapter of
our week-long series Inside
Putin's Russia explores the
country's propaganda
machine and the information
war against the West.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Instead
of offering communism
as an ideological
alternative, they are waging
a kind of hybrid war against
their enemies with a new
kind of soldier, hackers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as senators
work to overhaul the Affordable
Care Act, we continue our look
at how health care affects
the people who need it most
with a trip to West Virginia,
where Medicaid expansion
proved crucial.
REBECCA HICKS, West Virginia:
I put my faith in those people
that they would make this
place better, not take
away the only things that
were helping this area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For months,
a big question confronting
official Washington has been,
did the Trump campaign
collude with the Kremlin to
undermine Hillary Clinton?
Tonight, President Trump's
eldest son finds himself at the
heart of the matter after he
released a potentially
explosive e-mail chain.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: The e-mails
show Donald Trump junior
eager to hear dirt on
Hillary Clinton, said
to be offered as part of
Russian government support
for his father's campaign.
The chain begins with
message from Rob Goldstone.
He's a British-born
music publicist.
The younger Trump met him at
the 2013 Miss Universe Pageant
in Moscow, which President
Trump then owned.
Goldstone said a client's
father, a real estate developer
who teamed with President Trump
for that pageant, had
been told of official
documents and information
that would incriminate
Hillary and her
dealings with Russia.
Goldstone said it was part of
Russia and its government's
support for Mr. Trump.
Donald Trump Jr. responds: "If
it's what you say, I love it."
In a four-day flurry of e-mails,
Donald Trump Jr. and Goldstone
set up a meeting at Trump
Tower in New York with Russian
lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya.
Also attending, Trump son-in-law
Jared Kushner and campaign
chairman Paul Manafort.
Veselnitskaya told NBC News
today she has no connection
to Russian government and knew
nothing damaging about Clinton.
NATALIA VESELNITSKAYA,
Attorney (through translator):
It is quite possible
that maybe they were
looking for such an information.
They wanted it so badly.
JOHN YANG: Today, Donald Trump
Jr. said he thought he was being
offered political opposition
research.
The president's son says
he put out the e-mails to
be totally transparent.
On Capitol Hill, the
release generated more
questions than answers.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: I know Donald
Trump Jr. is new to politics.
I know that Jared Kushner is new
to politics, but this is going
to require a lot of questions
to be asked and answered.
SEN.
RON WYDEN (D), Oregon: If you
look at Donald Trump Jr.'s own
admissions -- these are his
words, not mine, his -- this
was an attempt at collusion.
And so now the question is
really, was it successful?
JOHN YANG: At an off-camera
White House briefing,
principal Deputy Press
Secretary Sarah Huckabee
Sanders read a one-line
statement from the president.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
"My son is a high-quality
person and I applaud
his transparency."
JOHN YANG: Sanders said
the president only learned
of his son's meeting
in the last several
days, but wouldn't say whether
he knew of the apparent Russian
offer to help his campaign.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to
Mark Mazzetti, Washington
investigations editor
for The New York Times.
He's been leading the
team of reporters that
broke today's story.
Mark Mazzetti, welcome
back to the program.
So, tell us what the latest
information is that The Times
is reporting on connections,
contacts between the
Trump, the Trump family
and Russian officials.
MARK MAZZETTI, The New York
Times: Well, last night, The
Times reported the existence of
an e-mail that showed that
the meeting that was brokered
in June of 2016 showed -- an
e-mail to Donald Trump
Jr. -- showed that
the offer of damaging
information about Hillary
Clinton came from the Russian
government or was purported to
come from the Russian government
and that Donald Trump Jr.
very eager responded that
he was very interested.
And it seemed to raise the
stakes, because it was no
longer just private information
from a lawyer, but something
that seemed to come from
Moscow and the Kremlin.
This morning, we reported on
the actual e-mails themselves,
what the e-mails contained that
show the long thread that led
up to the June 9, 2016, meeting
between these various players,
and at the same time, right as
we were about to publish, Donald
Trump Jr. put out the e-mails
himself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
again, striking language
in the e-mails, at
one point referring to
this is part of Russia
and its government's
support for Mr. Trump.
But I want to ask you
about what happened today.
When your reporters
reached out to Donald
Trump Jr., what happened?
MARK MAZZETTI: We reached out
to his attorney in the morning,
notifying him that we were
planning to publish the
contents of the e-mails
and gave them a deadline.
And right around the
time of the deadline,
when we were waiting for
their comment, Donald
Trump Jr. put the e-mails
themselves out on Twitter, and
that's when we published our
story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Was what Donald
Trump Jr. put out on Twitter
exactly what The Times had?
MARK MAZZETTI: The e-mails
that he put out are consistent
certainly with what we saw.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And The Times
was prepared to publish them
whether he had done that or
not?
MARK MAZZETTI: Well,
we were not planning to
publish actual e-mails.
We had a story ready describing
the e-mails with some actual
word-for-word language in
the e-mails.
And the word-for-word language
that we were going to quote
from in our story lined up
with what he put out on Twitter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it fair to
say, Mark Mazzetti, that Donald
Trump Jr. and others involved
in the story have
been cooperating?
Because the sense one gets
from reading these stories over
the past few days is that the
explanations you have been
given by Donald Trump Jr. and
by others has changed from day
to day.
MARK MAZZETTI: Yes, it's been
evolving over about four days.
Saturday, when we were
publishing our first
story about this meeting,
we got a response
from Donald Trump Jr. that the
meeting was about primarily
adoptions, which is a big
issue for the Russian government
relating to the sanctions
the United States has imposed
on the Russian government.
The next day when we were
publishing our second
story, we knew that the
meeting was not about
that.
It was about proposed
damaging information
about Hillary Clinton.
We got another statement
that said, yes, that's true.
However, it was something
anyone would do.
Any one part of the
campaign would look for
damaging information
about their opponent.
And then, yesterday, we
told them that we were
planning to publish the
e-mail that -- published
the existence of an e-mail
that indicated it was
Russian government support.
There's been yet another answer.
So, yes, it certainly has
evolved over several days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
Mark Mazzetti, what is
the White House saying
about the president's
involvement this?
What has Donald Trump
Jr. said about that?
MARK MAZZETTI: Well, what
the president knew about
this is still unclear.
The White House has said
the president didn't
know of the meeting.
And there has been some, I would
say, conflicting accounts coming
out of the White House about
just how to handle this story
and how it should be spun and
how to handle the damage that
was coming out of this story.
But the question of -- and
there has been, frankly, some
blame going on internally about
it.
But the question, the
main question, of course,
we are still endeavoring
to find out is what
now President Trump knew
about the meeting at the time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But as you say
,right now, the White House is
saying he had no involvement?
MARK MAZZETTI: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Mazzetti,
Washington investigations
editor for The New York
Times, thank you very
much.
MARK MAZZETTI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for more
on the latest documents in
the Russia investigation, we
turn to the vice chairman on
the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, Mark Warner of
Virginia.
He joins us from Capitol Hill.
Senator Warner, thank
you for being here.
What do you make of
this latest story?
®MD-BSEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia: Well,
Judy, again, I have said this
a couple of times, that you
can't make some
of this stuff up.
It would -- it
strains credibility.
This bothers me on
a variety of levels.
One, it bothers me that this
is a continuing series of
individuals affiliated with the
Trump campaign or the Trump
administration who say they
have had no meetings or contacts
with Russians, until there is
proof of those meetings, and
then they have to recant or,
in the case of General Flynn,
the national security adviser,
he got fired, or the attorney
general had to recuse himself.
And what's particularly, I
think, significant about these
last 48 hours is, this is the
first time the public is seeing
now in black and white what we
have heard from the intelligence
community, that there was an
organized effort by the Russian
government to interfere to
help one candidate, Donald
Trump, to hurt another
candidate, Hillary Clinton.
And what is so particularly
disturbing is that we have
now got the president's son,
the president's son-in-law and
the president's campaign manager
at the time all being willing
to take the meeting that this
so-called Russian agent, or at
least has been represented as
part of this Russian government
effort to discredit Clinton,
and that they were anxious
to receive this
kind of information.
I find that -- and there
would be folks like
special counsel Mueller
who will have to determine
whether that meets a legal
standard of criminality,
but it sure does make
it very important that
we in the Senate investigating
committee get a chance
to talk to all three
of these individuals,
which we plan to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
you mentioned -- you
used the word collusion.
You said that's what this
investigation has been about.
One of your Democratic
colleagues on the Intelligence
Committee, Senator Wyden
of Oregon, said today
this proves there was at
least an attempt at collusion.
Is that how you see it?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Well, Judy,
I feel like my job in
this investigation is to
keep this investigation
bipartisan, working
along with Chairman Burr.
I'm going to reserve my final
judgments until we get a chance
to talk to all of the witnesses,
get all of the information that
we're continuing to collect.
But it sure as heck bothers me
that there is this continuing
pattern of individuals
from the Trump campaign and
the Trump administration
denying these contacts
with Russians, and
then, when the proof comes
out, they dodge or dance
or amend their filings.
Well, now, in a particular case,
we're asked to believe that the
president's son and son-in-law
had information that was part
of a Russian government effort
to discredit their opponent,
and that somehow that was
never shared with their
father or father-in-law.
Again, I will accept that their
word until we get a chance
to talk to them in person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
how do you, though, interpret
their evolving explanations?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: It is -- frankly,
it strains credibility that
this administration continues
to say there's no there there,
yet we have seen this pattern,
not with one, two, three,
but literally I think it was
close to a dozen individuals
that have either been affiliated
with the information or in a
case of certain spokespeople
who said, for example, that Jim
Comey was fired because of his
bad performance with handling
the Hillary Clinton e-mails,
only to be corrected by the
president himself when he called
James Comey a nutjob in front
of the Russians and said it
was all about the Russian
investigation itself.
So, we have this constant
pattern where this
administration doesn't
come clean on these
items involving Russia until
the proof comes out, and then
we hear fairly feeble excuses.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I hear
you saying, Senator,
you're not prepared to
pronounce whether there
was collusion.
You're not prepared to
say whether there was
illegality, but you have
been around politics
now for a number of years.
How do you judge, how do you
weigh the -- at least the facts
on the table at this point?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Well, Judy, I
have heard some of the people
coming to the defense of the
president's son that this
was a rookie mistake.
I don't accept that.
I think anyone of any kind
of basic knowledge would know
that you don't take information
from a foreign power, and
particularly a foreign power
that's an adversary like Russia.
And, clearly, what was laid
out in the e-mail in black and
white was that this was part
of a Russian government effort
to help then candidate Trump.
And you see, not only was there
no pushback on that, but in
terms of reading the e-mail,
Donald Trump Jr. said, that's
great, and wouldn't it be great
if we got that information late
in the summer?
And if you follow the timeline
-- I'm sure all your audience
hasn't followed this quite
as closely as I have -- but
it was late in the summer that
more and more of these DNC
e-mails were released, where
then Trump confidant Roger Stone
first started tweeting about the
fact that he had contact with
a Russian cutout, Guccifer 2.0,
and that it would soon be John
Podesta's turn in
the so-called barrel.
And, sure enough, it was John
Podesta's e-mails that were
subsequently leaked as well.
So, the timing, in terms of
what Donald Trump Jr. was hoping
and then what came to pass
is also a little bit curious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, finally,
how do you view the likelihood
that the president himself
didn't know about this?
The White House is
saying he did not know.
Do you take them at their word?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I will take them
at their word at this point.
But the idea that the
president's son and son-in-law
had this kind of outreach from
what appears to be an agent of
the Russian government, and that
there was a Russian government
- - knowledge of an
effort to help candidate
Trump, I'm surprised
at least -- and, again,
I will take them at their
word -- but surprised at
least that this wouldn't
come up over dinner
conversation at some point
over the ensuing months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But can we
assume that's a question
you will be asking?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: You can
assume darn right that's a
question I will be asking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator
Mark Warner, vice chairman
of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence,
we thank you.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news: The U.S. military
confirmed that 15 Marines
and a Navy Corpsman died on
Monday when a tanker plane
crashed in Mississippi.
The plane's last stop was
the Cherry Point Marine Air
Station in North Carolina.
It went down in a soybean
field 85 miles north of
Jackson, Mississippi.
Thick smoke billowed
from the wreckage for
hours after the crash.
The FBI joined the
investigation, but
officials said they do
not suspect foul play.
In Iraq, scattered new fighting
erupted in Western Mosul, even
after the government claimed
total victory over
Islamic State fighters.
At the same time, Amnesty
International accused
ISIS militants of summary
executions and using
human shields.
It also blamed Iraqi forces
and U.S. coalition airstrikes
for civilian casualties.
But the coalition
disputed that claim.
LT.
GEN.
STEPHEN TOWNSEND, U.S. Army: I
would challenge the people from
Amnesty International or anyone
else out there who makes these
charges to first research their
facts and make sure they're
speaking from a
position of authority.
I would argue that this
is, I believe, the most
precise campaign in
the history of warfare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Much of Western
Mosul has been laid waste by
fighting that began in February.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
traveled to Qatar today,
trying to resolve a rift with
its Persian Gulf neighbors.
Four Arab nations have slapped
sanctions on the oil state
over charges that it fosters
Islamist extremism.
Tillerson signed a
counterterrorism agreement with
the Qatari foreign minister.
His next stop is Saudi Arabia,
one of the nations demanding
that Qatar reject militants
and limit its ties with Iran.
Back in this country, fire crews
in the Western U.S. made more
progress today, but, in some
cases, they were too late.
In Northern California, at
least 36 homes burned down
near Oroville over the weekend.
That fire is still burning
in places, keeping some
4,000 people from returning.
Fires are also still burning
in Southern California
and several other states.
New York City officialdom
turned out in force today for
the funeral of a police officer
killed last week.
A gunman attacked Miosotis
Familia as she sat in a mobile
command center in the Bronx.
Today, hundreds of NYPD officers
packed the church and turned
nearby streets into a sea
of blue.
Mayor Bill de Blasio led
the mourners, condemning
violence against police.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor
of New York: We have watched
with horror these attacks on
our police here in this
city and all around our
country, and it sickens us.
And we know they
cannot be tolerated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Familia was the
first female police officer
killed in the line of duty
in New York City since 9/11.
President Trump's election
fraud commission now says that
states don't have to provide
detailed voter
information just yet.
The panel put that word out
in an e-mail, as a federal
judge weighs a legal challenge
to the commission's actions.
A number of states have refused
to hand over data on voter
names, birth dates and partial
Social Security numbers.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
just half-a-point to close
at 21409.
The Nasdaq rose about 17 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped two.
Still to come on the
"NewsHour": inside Russia's
propaganda machine; a
view from West Virginia,
how changes to Medicaid could
affect people with addictions;
what's next for Mosul, the
Iraqi city once held by ISIS
now in ruin?; changes coming
to student loans under the
new education secretary;
and much more.
We return to our week-long
series, Inside Putin's Russia.
For years, the Kremlin and the
media it controls have waged
a multifaceted information and
disinformation campaign both
inside Russia, and pointed
at its perceived adversaries.
And last year, that effort
crescendoed here during the
U.S. presidential campaign.
Tonight, we look at
the information war.
With the help of the
Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting, special
correspondent Nick Schifrin
and producer Zach Fannin
begin their report in Moscow.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Russia,
whoever controls the media
controls the country.
And Saturday nights
are Sergey Brilev's.
The 44-year-old is an
anchor for Russia One.
It's the country's most popular
channel, and it's state-owned.
Do you think that that
means you have a Russian
perspective when you report?
SERGEY BRILEV, News Anchor:
Well, of course there's
a Russian perspective.
There is a perspective of
your country in any reporting.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Brilev says
he doesn't feel pressure to
push the government's line.
During the show we saw,
he challenged a government
minister about police
jailing a former theater
director who's a
government critic.
SERGEY BRILEV: I imagine
that tomorrow -- tonight,
after the broadcast, I
may have some security
agencies, and saying, what
does he think he's saying?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russian
state media have long
delivered the government
perspective and rallied
the public behind it.
Brilev denies that's his job.
But he hints at whose job it is.
SERGEY BRILEV: The Sunday
program, which is quite
conservative in Western
terms, ultra-conservative,
I would say.
NICK SCHIFRIN:
Aggressive, perhaps?
SERGEY BRILEV: Well,
FOX News-style.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Sunday night
anchor Dmitry Kiselyov is part
Sean Hannity, part Stephen
Colbert.
He's crass and entertaining,
and widely believed to reflect
the Kremlin's thinking.
DMITRY KISELYOV, News Anchor:
The American press is driving
Trump into a bullfight with
no rules.
The aim is impeachment.
No pretext?
It will be created, invented,
engineered, exaggerated.
CIA staff hackers are
hiding behind another
name, for example, behind
the so-called Russian
hackers.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Kiselyov started
targeting Russia's opponents
in 2012 after massive protests
threatened President Vladimir
Putin, says journalist
and author Mikhail Zygar.
MIKHAIL ZYGAR,
Journalist/Author: That
was very important to
start hating the enemies.
That's the point when the
audience starts believing you.
DMITRY KISELYOV (through
translator): Russia is
the only country in the
world that is realistically
capable of turning the United
States into radioactive ash.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Until 2015,
Zygar was the anchor and
editor in chief of TV Rain.
In a sea of state media, TV Rain
was an independent TV island.
MIKHAIL ZYGAR: We have had
the reputation of the only TV
channel that is trying to make
real investigations.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 2014,
TV Rain accused the
Kremlin's chief political
strategist of corruption.
MIKHAIL ZYGAR: There was
a very short, but very
effective campaign against us.
I was getting like hundreds
of personal messages with
people wishing me death.
Then all the major networks
had direct phone calls from
Kremlin and they had to switch
us off.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Within one
month, their audience dropped
from 20 million to 60,000.
Protesters fought to
keep them on the air.
But targeting critical
media is nothing new.
In the last six years,
the Kremlin targeted
12 critical newsrooms.
Zygar says state TV tries
to convince Russians to
support their government
by replacing reality
with a carefully
crafted message.
MIKHAIL ZYGAR: Democracy
does not exist.
Our system is much more stable,
because we have much more
-- much stronger leadership.
DMITRY KISELYOV (through
translator): Putin is
universally accepted
as one of the most
qualified heads of state
on the planet, if not
the most qualified.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But
this isn't only about
shaping Russian opinion.
Kiselyov considers the
news a weapon aimed at
Russia's enemies, as he
put it in an interview
on his own channel.
DMITRY KISELYOV (through
translator): If you can persuade
a person, you don't need to kill
him.
Let's think about what's
better: to kill or to persuade?
Because if you aren't
able to persuade, then
you will have to kill.
®MD-BMARGARITA SIMONYAN,
Editor in Chief, R.T.:
If the politics of
defending your country's
interest is pro-Russian, then
probably we are pro-Russian.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Margarita
Simonyan is the editor
in chief of R.T.,
formerly known as Russia
Today.
She says the network reaches
35 million viewers a day in six
languages, including American
and international channels.
It's state-owned and
aimed at foreign audiences
as an alternative to
channels Simonyan calls
pro-Western, CNN and BBC.
®MD-BMARGARITA SIMONYAN:
If you look at any station,
you will see that what people
are reporting comes from what
they believe in, where they
stand, their background, what
their countries believe in.
And let us be one of the voices
in that choir, because when
the choir sings just one song,
awful things happen,
like the war in Iraq.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Critics say
R.T. isn't just another media
voice; it highlights conspiracy
theories.
WOMAN: The article
basically accuses the
U.S. of manufacturing
this Ebola outbreak.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It describes
a Holocaust denier as a
human rights activist.
MAN: Russia is a threat
to the U.S.' hegemony.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And a
neo-Nazi as a German expert.
MAN: Germany is a country which
supports violent Islamism.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The criticism
is, again, that you're trying
to confuse, rather than inform.
®MD-BMARGARITA SIMONYAN:
Now, that's absolutely a lie.
We're never trying to confuse.
We're informing.
If we do have people appearing
on the air live that are later
found out to be Holocaust
deniers or anything like that,
we immediately put them onto a
list of people who are forbidden
from the air.
You are telling me that
people in the West are
seeing us as a threat.
Believe me, most of the
people in Russia are seeing
the West as a threat.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the
West, the biggest threat
in terms of information
comes from that building.
That is the headquarters of the
FSB, the successor to the KGB.
During Soviet times, the
KGB launched deliberate
disinformation campaigns,
like planting the
idea that President Kennedy
was killed by the CIA.
Today, Western governments
accuse the FSB of launching
the same kinds of campaigns,
except, instead of offering
communism as an ideological
alternative, they are waging a
kind of hybrid war against
their enemies, with a new
kind of soldier, hackers.
Over the last two years,
the Russian military
ran online recruiting
ads where soldiers put
down their guns to
fight a cyber-war.
In a January report, U.S.
intelligence agencies
accused Russia of hacking
Democratic National
Committee and Hillary
Clinton campaign e-mails
and leaking them to
WikiLeaks to fuel Russia's
propaganda campaign.
It was designed to -- quote
-- "undermine public faith in
the U.S. democratic process,
denigrate Secretary Clinton,
and harm her electability
and potential presidency."
It worked.
MEGYN KELLY, FOX News: The
Clinton campaign has now had
to deal with more than a week
of embarrassing
daily revelations,
thanks to WikiLeaks.
MAN: Now, these
WikiLeaks' releases have
rocked the campaign.
MIKA BRZEZINSKI, MSNBC:
WikiLeaks has released
what appears to be
transcripts of paid speeches
by Hillary Clinton
to Goldman Sachs.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Hacked
e-mails became anti-Clinton
talking points.
And many of those talking
points were spread
online by fake accounts
known as trolls believed
to work in this St.
Petersburg building.
Forty-two-year-old Marat
Mindiyarov used to be
one of those trolls.
MARAT MINDIYAROV, Former Troll:
Every day, you see a lot of
comment at night, and they're
all the same, yes.
And it's exactly the
people doing their job.
They have their topic.
They have a time to do it.
They write it, and you see it.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Every day,
Mindiyarov would get a document
that instructed him what to
write.
On Christmas Eve, 2014, he was
told to -- quote - - "create a
negative attitude about Obama's
foreign policy."
So he posted photos comparing
Obama to Hitler, portraying
the U.S. as a fish about to eat
the planet and an eagle
sharpening his talons.
He posted under the headline,
"Can the U.S. take Russia out?"
on 50 Web sites in 23 cities.
And fellow trolls Kiril
Ivashkin, Gennady Orlov, Mike
Brandon expressed the exact same
thought, 600 posts from 70
fake accounts in 12 hours, just
one battalion in a sock puppet
army manufactured by
a handful of trolls.
How many identities will
the workers be expected
to pretend to be?
MARAT MINDIYAROV: Hundreds.
Hundreds.
Really, hundreds.
I myself maybe had 20, 30.
I didn't count them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: U.S. intelligence
says the likely troll
financier is Evgeny Prigozhin,
a businessman with
catering companies.
He's been dubbed
Putin's personal chef.
Mindiyarov left the
factory because he didn't
believe in its product.
But he says it's effective
because the stories are
succinct and echoed widely.
MARAT MINDIYAROV: Everything
is very simple there, yes,
black and white, no color, just
black and white.
BEN NIMMO, Atlantic Council:
Russian propaganda is actually
very predictable and relatively
simple.
And I think of it as the
four D's, which are dismiss,
distort, distract, and dismay.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Ben Nimmo is An
Atlantic Council senior fellow
studying how Russian media,
Russian hacking and
Russian trolling combine.
BEN NIMMO: You get your
own people to write this,
but then you pretend
it's not your people,
it's just some do-gooders
in Russian society.
All the different parts of your
machine then amplify it, and
what you're doing is you're
pushing out in a dozen
different languages on all the
different platforms there are,
one story.
And what that story is what
the Kremlin wants it to be.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In January 2016,
it was a fake story that a
Russian-German teenager had been
abducted and raped
by Muslim migrants.
BEN NIMMO: The Russian state
TV apparatus repeatedly
reporting false claims after the
German police had come out
and said that there was no
abduction and there was no rape.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The fake story
helped spark real protests
against German President Angela
Merkel, a frequent Putin critic.
But even though it was fake,
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
used it to criticize one of
Russia's top adversaries.
BEN NIMMO: The motivation
behind the campaign as a whole
was precisely to weaken Merkel
by amplifying this
very personalized story
about crimes committed
by, in inverted commas,
Merkel's migrants.
MAN: We investigate the
stories misrepresented
by the mainstream media.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last year,
the Russian propaganda
machine exploited a
research psychologist
who argued Google was
manipulating its results
to favor Clinton.
BEN NIMMO: So, this
is a gentlemen called
Dr. Robert Epstein.
He came out with a paper which
said that by altering the
results of a search engine, you
could potentially alter
people's voting choices.
DR.
ROBERT EPSTEIN, Research
Psychologist: And
Google's support for
Clinton is really very
strong.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It
was quickly debunked.
But the different parts
of the Russian propaganda
machine echoed the story,
from R.T., to state-owned
Web site Sputnik,
to Russian trolls.
BEN NIMMO: This is a
classic example in which
the different parts of the
machine were amplifying
each other.
What you then had was the claim
being picked up by a number
of largely conservative media
in the U.S.
MAN: It looks like Google
is in the tank for Hillary.
DR.
ROBERT EPSTEIN: There's
no question about it.
BEN NIMMO: And now
you have divorced the
story from the source.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Well, you
have laundered -- you have
literally laundered the source.
BEN NIMMO: And in that sense,
the source has been laundered.
Then candidate Trump said
words the effect of Google was
rigging its results in favor
of Clinton.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: Google's search
engine was suppressing the
bad news about Hillary Clinton.
BEN NIMMO: Now, we don't know
where he got that from, but
we know that the insertion
point for that story was a
Kremlin disinformation outlet.
For any purveyor of propaganda,
your dream is to have some
high-value amplifier amplifying
you, especially if you can
contrive that in such a way
that you are divorced from it.
DONALD TRUMP: How about that?
How about that?
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Moscow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow,
we travel to Russia's
southern border, and
ask why so many young
Russians have joined ISIS.
With Congress back from their
Independence Day break, the
pressure is on for Republicans
to broker a deal on health
care, in addition to other high
priorities like tax reform,
all of this as the August
recess looms just weeks away.
In a minute, John Yang will be
back to talk to Lisa Desjardins,
but, first, Lisa has the
current state of
play on Capitol Hill.
LISA DESJARDINS: With the
health care fight unresolved
and no action on the budget or
tax reform, Utah Senator Mike
Lee and nine fellow Republicans
asked today to cancel the
August recess.
SEN.
MIKE LEE (R), Utah: At this
time, it doesn't make sense for
us to just take the month of
August off.
LISA DESJARDINS: Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell
partially obliged.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: We will be in
session the first two weeks of
August.
LISA DESJARDINS: That
buys a little more time
to tackle a daunting
agenda, topped by replacing
Obamacare.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: We will be
on health care next week.
We will be laying out a revised
version of the repeal and
replace effort, the text of
that, on Thursday morning.
LISA DESJARDINS: Multiple
Republican senators
told "NewsHour" this
is what's in the latest
plan: It restores an
investment tax and a
Medicare tax on the wealthy.
Plans to cut those taxes drew
criticism as helping the rich.
More subsidies or tax
credits for lower-income
families and billions
more for opioid treatment.
But indications are there
will be essentially no changes
to the Medicaid section.
That would cut the number of
people on Medicaid by millions.
And one unusual twist:
Republicans are still mulling an
amendment from Texas Senator Ted
Cruz that will allow
insurers to offer just
one Obamacare-compliant
plan and avoid its
regulations in the rest.
That general idea could
bring on Cruz and other
key votes like Lee.
SEN.
MIKE LEE: That's one way to
get me to yes on the bill.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Democrats,
like Senator Jeanne Shaheen,
voiced a concern some Republican
moderates share.
SEN.
JEANNE SHAHEEN (D), New
Hampshire: Our Republican
colleagues haven't
had just six months to
put together a health care bill.
They have had seven
years and six months.
And the Cruz amendment
is not the answer.
It would roll back
protections for people with
preexisting conditions.
It would cost more
for consumers.
LISA DESJARDINS: All said, it
is not yet clear if a revised
plan will get the 50 votes it
needs.
McConnell wants to hold
that vote next week,
and many Republicans
say it's time, win or
lose.
SEN.
JOHN KENNEDY (R), Louisiana: In
my judgment, it's time to vote.
LISA DESJARDINS: These
are unusual times.
The Senate Historian's Office
tells me that only once in
modern history has the Senate
cut short its August recess.
John, guess what the topic was?
It was 1994.
It was health care.
Democrats failed to pass
their bill back then.
JOHN YANG:
Hillarycare back then.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, you said
that the Cruz amendment
is going to be key.
But Senator McConnell also
said that Thursday, they
are going to see a text.
How are going to they
handle the Cruz amendment?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
This is a bit of a tricky --
it's actually - - think of it
as two different bills, a bill
A and a bill B. It
will be the same text.
Only, one will have the Cruz
amendment, one will not.
The big moment to decide which
goes forward will be Monday,
probably, when we expect the
Congressional Budget Office
to come out with its score to
say, does the Cruz amendment
help these markets, what does
it do for premiums, what does it
do for preexisting conditions?
That will be the
big decision moment.
JOHN YANG: And in your spot,
you said that they still don't
have the 50 votes for what
is probably going to
come out Thursday.
Are they going to continue
to tweak it to try to
get the votes they need?
Or how is that going to work?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
that's why we didn't
see text today, John.
That's why saw sort of a
framework and Vice President
Pence up there trying to massage
people into this.
But, honestly, coming out of
the meeting, some people were
more warm to it, like Bob
Corker today.
Others, like Lisa
Murkowski, came out, was
there, was there progress
made on things important
to you?
She turned to reporters
and just said no.
JOHN YANG: So, there's
still some work to go
for someone like that.
They have got two
extra weeks now.
What else are they going to do?
Are there other things they
have got to get done before
they get their reward by going
home for recess?
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: Well,
here's the thing.
If they take the vote on health
care next week, there are
many who think it could fail
and that Mitch McConnell
will let it fail.
At that point, then, they would
have another decision to make.
Do we try again, a different
kind of Republican bill, or do
we in fact work with Democrats,
come up with an entire 'nother
approach to health care to try
to fix the Obamacare markets?
Do we try and pass
that before we leave in
the middle of August?
Then they also have a budget
to deal with, spending bills.
Conservatives want to actually
do a proper spending process
and debate spending cuts,
rather than just have one
big bill dropped on at once.
There is a lot of work to do.
It's not clear how they will
get the votes to do it, though,
but now they do have more
time.
JOHN YANG: Lisa Desjardins,
a lot of work for them,
a lot of work for you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking
of the efforts to replace the
Affordable Care Act, let's
continue hearing how
some citizens and health
care providers see it.
Producer Jason Kane visited
a pair of clinics in the
heart of coal country.
Last night, we took you to the
town of Wise, Virginia, in a
state that opted not to expand
Medicaid for
low-income residents.
Just across the border, in West
Virginia, the Affordable Care
Act and its Medicaid expansion
meant the rate of uninsured
residents dropped from at least
21 percent before the law took
effect to 9 percent in 2015,
and nearly a third of families
in the state do get Medicaid.
More than 83 percent of
Mingo County voted for the
president in the election.
And the state has been ravaged
by the opioids epidemic.
But at the Williamson Health
and Wellness Center, nerves
are now on edge as patients
recount their personal stories.
REBECCA HICKS, West Virginia:
My name's Rebecca Hicks, and I'm
from Chattaroy, West Virginia.
I'm 37 years old.
When I was younger, I was raped.
I guess I got on drugs to cope
with it, regular pain pills.
First, it started with, you
know, snorting the pills.
Then it led to
shooting the pills.
And I have always
struggled to have a doctor.
And this place kind of
takes care of all of it.
My access to Medicaid has helped
me pay for medicines that I
would never have been able
to pay for and to see
specialists that I wouldn't
be able to see if I
didn't have that medical
care.
JEROME CLINE, Family
Nurse Practitioner: My
name's Jerome Cline.
I'm a family nurse practitioner.
With the passage of the
Affordable Care Act, the state
had expanded Medicaid programs.
Right now, it's just under
50 percent of our patients,
I think, are Medicaid.
VICKI HATFIELD, Family
Nurse Practitioner: My
name is Vicki Hatfield.
I'm a certified family
nurse practitioner and a
certified diabetes educator.
Once we started seeing more
patients qualify for Medicaid,
they were able to come in, and
we were able to start getting
them caught up on their
preventive screenings and health
promotion activities, and
just be able to treat their
chronic illnesses that had been
neglected.
The increased funds for Medicaid
services brought more revenue
into the clinic, so that
allowed us to hire
more people here.
It also allowed us to do some
other things in the community
to promote healthy living.
JEROME CLINE: We have a
farmers market every Saturday.
VICKI HATFIELD: We also had
community gardens start.
And we see more people
growing their own vegetables.
JEROME CLINE: We have a
community 5K almost every month.
And then we have a community
health worker program.
It's certainly a lot of cheaper
to keep people healthy at home
than it is once they get into
the system.
VICKI HATFIELD: Now, as we watch
what's happening with possible
repeal or replacement of the
Affordable Care Act,
it's very concerning.
I know patients are concerned,
particularly patients who
had chronic diseases that now
they're able to get
medications for, or patients
who need annual screening.
CONNIE SUE MAHON, West Virginia:
I have got a head injury.
I have got a sleeping disorder.
I have got back problems.
I have got knee problems.
I have panic attacks.
My name is Connie Sue Mahon.
We need the medical.
And if they take it, it's
going to hurt a lot of
families in West Virginia.
President Trump promised
us a better plan.
And we all voted to get him
in there because we thought
he'd do this country better.
But if we ain't got that
medical, we won't have nothing.
And that's how people
in Mingo County live.
JERINEL TAYLOR, West Virginia:
My name is Jerinel Taylor.
I'm 58 years old.
I have diabetes.
You have to have the medication
to keep the diabetes down.
If you don't, you lose your
eyes, your kidneys, and all this
stuff, so I try to keep up with
it.
I started receiving the Medicaid
after the Obamacare, the
Affordable Care Act, or whatever
it was called.
With the care I receive here,
my numbers have come down, my
blood pressure, and they keep
everything pretty much took
care of for me, the mammograms
and all the cancer screenings
that I need.
Affordable Care Act has helped
me, but it has hurt other
people, especially people like
my brother.
It's hurt him.
And he works hard.
And then they take it out
of his taxes because he
doesn't have insurance.
He can't afford the insurance
under the Affordable Care Act.
So, it has hurt him.
So, if they drop
me, they drop me.
JEROME CLINE: Thinking about
the possible changes to the
health care system and the
drive to save money
with Medicaid, I'm
not sure if there's an
accounting of these people
now seeking their primary care
through the E.R.s, when they
can come here and the visit,
and pay a small co-pay, vs.
going to the E.R., and all of
a sudden, it's a $2,000 bill.
REBECCA HICKS: About
two years ago, I had
been in the hospital,
like in the mental ward
for my mental health
at least 25 times.
And now I have hadn't
had to be hospitalized
for over two years,
because of all the doctors
here that has helped me so much.
JEROME CLINE: Especially now,
with the drug epidemic around
here, what are we going to
do with the people who
have found an improved
quality of life, and
they have moved beyond,
you know, a life of
addiction, and we have
got them into recovery?
If we curtail that
treatment, what potentially
happens to those patients?
VICKI HATFIELD: I would
like to see the Medicaid
expansion continue.
I would like to see
also a revision for
some of the premiums.
I have some patients who did not
qualify for Medicaid expansion,
but they also could not
afford the premium
and the deductible.
I think that needs
to be revisited.
I think there are good parts
to the program, but there are
also some things that do need
improvement.
REBECCA HICKS: I would tell
the politicians that they might
want to think real hard about
it and take a break from it a
little bit until they know more
about it, because what they're
dealing is, if they take
health care away from somebody
that's an addict, they're going
to resort to worser things.
I chose those people.
I put my faith in those people
that they would make this
place better, not take away the
only things that were
helping this area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraqi leaders
and the top American military
commander in Iraq proclaimed the
liberation of the city
of Mosul yesterday.
But what's the next step
in that war-torn country?
Does the Iraqi government have
a plan to prevent ISIS from
returning and to rebuild Iraq's
second largest city?
For some answers, we
turn to Feisal Istrabadi.
He's a former Iraqi diplomat,
and he's now director of the
Middle East Center at Indiana
University, Bloomington.
Feisal Istrabadi, welcome
back to the program.
How much of a blow to
ISIS was the retaking
of the city of Mosul?
FEISAL ISTRABADI, Former Deputy
Iraqi Ambassador to United
Nations: Well, it's a huge blow,
because one of the ways in which
ISIL distinguished its brand
from al-Qaida before was that it
was able to conquer and
hold territory, erase an
international boundary,
declare a caliphate,
and engage in the fight against
forces that regard it as
infidel, be they other Muslims
or Western forces.
And so it sort of distinguished
itself in that way.
And now it is retreating.
It has lost the largest
city that it occupied.
There are plans under way to
make it lose Raqqa as well
in Syria, and slowly -- and
hopefully not slowly
to expel it from Iraq.
So, it's a psychological and an
ideological, huge blow to ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
does it still control?
What capability
does it still have?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: Well, it still
has the ability - - I mean, your
own reporting earlier in the
program was that it still is
able to put on sort of the
skirmish attacks, although, last
week, it was able to
manage to conduct an
attempt at a counterattack,
which was repelled,
of course.
But the main fear that
I have now is that ISIL
becomes a classical
terrorist organization,
as al-Qaida was before, able
to pull off, you know, attacks
of varying size in Baghdad
and other places.
And we're already seeing that
it is metamorphosing into
that kind of an organization.
And that again is
deeply disturbing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how
well-equipped is the government
of Iraq to deal with that?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: It's
very difficult to repel
those sorts of attacks.
You have to have perfect
intelligence and a perfect
ability to respond.
And, unfortunately, neither the
Iraqi government now, nor the
Americans when they had a large
presence, when the U.S. had a
large presence in Iraq, have
been able to control that.
The ultimate solution for this
problem has to be political.
It has to be a situation where
sort of the underlying disease
which has allowed at least
enough people to fail
to participate in the
political process, that
sort of disease has
to be treated, rather than
continuing to treat the
symptoms of the disease.
And that, we have collectively,
the Iraqis, the international
community, we have collectively
failed to do that
over the years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're referring
to the sectarian divisions in
Iraq that have led to one group
prevailing over another.
Do you see any improvement in
the Shia-Sunni divisions in
Iraq over the last several years
since the larger
war ended there?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: I see hope
that the future need not
be what the past has been.
I think that, in distinction
to his predecessor, the current
prime minister of Iraq has good
intentions.
What we don't have,
however, is a plan.
Good intentions will not get
us past this sort of impasse
that we have been in since
after 2003.
There needs to be a coming
together of the Iraqi political
class, and a sort of a sorting
out of what our priorities are
and how we prepare our modus
vivendi, how we engage in
reconciliation, what kinds of
power-sharing we're willing
to engage, all within a larger
constitutional,
democratic framework.
And that, unfortunately,
we haven't done.
And now we have to do it at
the same time as we have the
reconstruction of the country
at hand, as well, of course, as
providing immediate humanitarian
relief for the refugees
fleeing the cities that are
being liberated from ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And when you
speak of we having to do this,
are you referring to the United
States or are you referring
to the Iraqi government?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: All of us.
I think that that is something
that the international
community, the United
States, of course the
Iraqis in the first instance
-- it has to be an Iraqi
project in the first instance.
But the United States is
a part of the process.
The international community
needs to encourage these three
tracks, sort of the immediate
humanitarian relief,
the physical rebuilding
of the country, and,
more importantly, the
political rebuilding
of the country.
That is going to be sort of
a multipronged effort that
has to occur simultaneously.
And the Iraqis will
need the support of the
international community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And very, very
quickly, you see the will of
the international community
to do that?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: I hope
so, because the failure
of the Iraqis to do
this, the failure of the
international community
to support this effort
will mean that, just
as al-Qaida left ISIL,
this incarnation of ISIL will
lead to ISIL 2.0, 3.0, 4.0.
And that's just condemning the
Middle East, the region and
perhaps the world to an endless
cycle of violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
sobering message.
Feisal Istrabadi, we
thank you very much.
FEISAL ISTRABADI: Thank you.
It's a pleasure, as always.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Since
her nomination as U.S.
Secretary of Education,
Betsy DeVos has become
one of the more polarizing
figures in the Trump Cabinet,
often over school choice.
But her early tenure marks a big
departure from her predecessors
when it comes to higher
education and student loans.
And that's the focus
of our Making the Grade
conversation tonight.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Late in the Obama
administration, new rules were
established to allow student
borrowers to have their debt
erased if they'd been victims
of fraud by for-profit schools.
But as the new rules were set
to take effect this month,
the new administration called
for a freeze, with Secretary
DeVos saying they were created
in a -- quote -- "muddled
process that's unfair to
students and schools."
Days ago, 18 states and
the District of Columbia
responded to that with
a lawsuit challenging
the Education Department.
The freeze is just one
in a series of moves by
the new administration
that take a different
approach to student loans
from its predecessor.
Anya Kamenetz covers education
for NPR, and joins us now.
So, Anya, first, remind us
the extent of this problem, of
students on the hook with loans
to for-profit colleges
and all the criticisms
of predatory practices.
ANYA KAMENETZ, NPR: So,
for-profit colleges at
their height enrolled
about one in 10 students
nationwide, and they're not just
your old cosmetology school.
These are national and in many
cases online programs that
targeted working families.
Now, without painting the entire
sector with the same brush, we
did see over the last decade
many, many different
actions against for-profit
colleges, accusing them of
predatory and fraudulent
treatment.
And there were two large
colleges that shut down in the
last two years, Corinthian and
ITT Tech, with collectively
tens of thousands of students.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, so I mentioned
the Obama administration,
they put in rules to
address the problem, and
they created a so-called
borrower defense.
Explain that.
ANYA KAMENETZ: So, borrower
defense to repayment had been
a law on the books for a while.
And it was sort of a
case-by-case ability or
pathway for a borrower
who had been defrauded
by a college to be able
to escape their loans.
And what happened was,
with tens of thousands of
students affected by the
ITT Tech and Corinthian
shutdown, there was a real
need to clarify and to
simplify that regulation.
And so, after a very
long negotiated public
process, borrower
defense to repayment was
put in place.
And basically what it said
was that students could have
their repayment automated, they
wouldn't have to
apply case by case.
And it included a really
important clause that students
wouldn't have to agree to waive
their rights through
arbitration, so that
when -- you know, many
of these for-profit
colleges had a rule on the
books that when you applied,
you said, we're not -- I'm not
going to sue you and I
agree to arbitration.
And that's something that
borrower defense included as
well, which is pretty important
here.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
so that was supposed to
go into effect on July 1.
Betsy DeVos put that on hold.
What is her argument?
And then, of course, the states
jumped in with a lawsuit.
So what's the counterargument?
ANYA KAMENETZ: So, we should
mention that, in addition to
pressing pause or hitting reset
on borrowed defense
to repayment, which is
like the remedy, Betsy
DeVos also has rolled
back something called gainful
employment, which you might
think of as the prevention.
And gainful employment
also regulates for-profit
colleges and other
career programs based on
the debt-to-income
ratio of their students.
So, with those two in mind, the
lawsuit essentially says that
it's a violation of law for the
Education Department to
unilaterally strike down this
rule after this very, very long
and public negotiation process.
And with the reset button
being hit, what we saw this
week is consumer advocates and
students once again taking to
the podium to testify and talk
about their experiences and
why they believe that these
two rules should stay in place.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, just in
our last minute now, I just
want to expand to more generally
look at the overall
student loan problem.
Where do you see the major
differences and the major
flash points now with
the new administration?
ANYA KAMENETZ: Well, I think we
saw, with Obama taking office
right around the financial
crisis, the creation of
the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, which
became a major watchdog
on behalf of students, and many,
many actions taken against the
for-profit sector, but really
also against student
lenders in general.
There's been a real atmosphere
of, I would say, crackdown
in regulation and consumer
advocacy.
And the tenor has
certainly changed in
terms of the announcements
coming out of the DeVos
administration.
She has hired former for-profit
college students - - sorry --
she has hired former for-profit
college executives to advise
her, as well as putting in
charge of federal student aid
the CEO of a private
student loan company.
She has made a lot of
announcements on behalf
of things that will
save taxpayers money and
lead to less burden on
colleges and universities,
including for-profit colleges.
And so a lot of her statements
really made clear that she
doesn't intend to impose onerous
regulatory burdens
on either for-profit
colleges or other types of
colleges, as well as the
student loan industry as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anya Kamenetz
of NPR, thank you very much.
ANYA KAMENETZ:
Thank you, Jeffrey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And thanks
to Jeff and to Anya.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, our Russia
series goes to the country's
southern border, and asks why so
many Russians have joined ISIS.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.